# 1. Algebra

## New Ideas

- **Difference of two squares**
    
    You can use *difference of two squares* for both expanding and factorising
    
    ### Expanding
    
    This technique is convenient for expanding expressions, and saves time going through the whole FOIL process. `(a+b)(a-b)` becomes $a^2 - b^2$
    
    ### Factorising
    
    This technique is also *required* for factorising numbers. When you have the form $a^2 - b^2$ this is needed to factorise that
    
    <aside>
    💡 NOTE: If you identify a place where difference of two squares could be used, try making both sides *become squares* first. This can help achieve the technique effectively
    
    For example, if you have $x-64x^3$, you can make both sides *become* a square by factorising by $x$ to make $1 - 64x^2$. *Difference of two squares* can then be applied to this to create $x(1+8x)(1-8x)$
    
    </aside>
    
    <aside>
    💡 Note that sometimes things may *look like* a “difference of two squares” when they’re actually not. For example, you might have a situation like $64k^2 - 16k = 0$, and in this case you should **factorize fully** into $4k(16k-1) = 0$, then look at these as roots of a quadratic ($k = 0$ or $k = \frac{1}{16}$).
    
    </aside>
    
- **Achieving certain bases**
    
    If you need a square/cube number of some kind to have a certain base, you can break apart the base into a power. For example, if you have:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}27^{2x+1}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    And you want to make the base `3`, you can break the base into $3^3$, like so:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}(3^3)^{2x+1}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    From there, you can use the index rule to multiply the two and get them how you want them.
    
- **Try different forms**
    
    Some of the processes in A Levels are rather "discovery"-based, i.e. you just need to try things as you go along. In order to achieve this the easiest way, you can try writing the equation in some different forms, which may help make them more usable.
    
    For example, if you have the fraction:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}\frac{x^3}{64}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    By rooting the top and bottom, you could rewrite this as below, which may be significantly easier to work with.
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}(\frac{x}{4})^3\end{equation*}
    $$
    
- **Inverted cancellation**
    
    You can cancel out values from the bottom up in fractions, not just from the top to the bottom. For example, if you have:
    
    $$
    \frac{3\sqrt{63}}{63}
    $$
    
    You can divide both the top and the bottom by `3` and place it on the bottom, like so:
    
    $$
    \frac{3\sqrt{63}}{63} \div \frac{3}{3} = \frac{\sqrt{63}}{21}
    $$
    
    This is possible because all you're doing is dividing both the top *and* the bottom by "3", which is allowed.
    
- **Powers on fractions**
    
    When you apply a power to a **fraction**, it affects everything within that fraction. So:
    
    $$
    (\frac{a}{b})^2 = \frac{a^2}{b^2}
    $$
    
    This also applies to **fractional** and **negative** indices. For example:
    
    $$
    (\frac{a}{b})^{\frac{1}{2}} = (\frac{a^{\frac{1}{2}}}{b^{\frac{1}{2}}}) = \frac{\sqrt{a}}{\sqrt{b}}
    $$
    
    Don't worry when you see things like:
    
    $$
    (\frac{1}{16})^{\frac{1}{2}} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{16}}
    $$
    
    This is *exactly* the same rule as mentioned above, it's just the square root of `1` happens to be `1` so the example isn't showing the root, that's all.
    
- **Roots on fractions**
    
    Just like **powers on fractions,** roots on fractions also apply to the numerator and the denominator:
    
    $$
    \sqrt{\frac{a}{b}} = \frac{\sqrt{a}}{\sqrt{b}}
    $$
    
- **Identities**
    
    An identity is represented with an $\equiv$ symbol instead of an =, and it means that both sides are **always** equal for every single value of x. This is different from = which essentially really means “These two are equal all the time or some of the time, and you can try and solve when”.
    
    You *can* rearrange in identities, we just don’t usually do it because you’re not trying to solve the expression.
    
- **Base Elision**
    
    When you have what you're in the power of term, you can remove (elide the bases of those terms if they're the same, like so:
    
    $$
    3^x = 3^4 \\
    \space\\
    x = 4
    $$
    
    If your bases are **not the same**, you may be able to *root* the base of one of them and rewrite it as a power to get them the same, like so:
    
    $$
    3^x = 9^4 \\
    \space\\
    3^x = (3^2)^4 \\
    \space\\
    3^x = 3^8 \\
    \space\\
    x = 8
    $$
    
    <aside>
    💡 Make sure you don't get tripped up - $(x^a)^b = x^{a*b}$, remember that$(x^a)^b \ne x^{a+b}$
    
    </aside>
    
- **Equal Fraction Flip**
    
    When you have:
    
    $$
    \frac{a}{b} = \frac{c}{d}
    $$
    
    You can actually flip these fractions around and they'll continue to be equal.
    
    $$
    \frac{b}{a} = \frac{d}{c}
    $$
    
- **Factorising with negative terms**
    
    When you have an expression with negative terms in it like $2x(3x -1)^{\frac{1}2} + \frac{3}2x^2(3x-1)^{-\frac{1}2}$, you should always factorise out the *most negative* of the two, to get: $x(3x-1)^{-\frac{1}2}(2(3x-1)+\frac{3}2x)$.
    

## Reasonings

- **Multiplying both numerator and denominator**
    
    When working with algebra, you have to multiply both the numerator and denominator by the very same thing in order to not change the fraction. The reason why multiplying both by the same works is that the fraction you're multiplying by is equal to 1.
    
- **Why square roots are $\pm$**
    
    When you have an expression such as:
    
    $$
    x^2  = y
    $$
    
    And you move the power over to the other side, it becomes $\pm\sqrt{}$. This happens because when you put something to the power of something else, any negative was there is lost. This means that if I had:
    
    $$
    x^2 = 9
    $$
    
    You may think that `x` must be `3`. But, if it were `-3` - the equation would *also* work, so it could have been *either* 3 or -3.
    
- **Why no double divisions**
    
    If you have a double division, such as:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}\frac{a}{(\frac{b}{c})}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    You can multiply the top and bottom by the "c", therefore resulting in:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}\frac{a}{(\frac{b}{c})} * \frac{c}{c} = \frac{ac}{b}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    Similarly, if you have the fraction:
    
    $$
    \frac{(\frac{a}{b})}{c}
    $$
    
    You can divide the top and bottom of the top one by $c$, resulting in:
    
    $$
    \frac{a}{b} \div \frac{c}{1} = \frac{a}{bc}
    $$
    

## Speed Tips

- **FOIL is unneeded**
    
    FOIL is literally just multiplying all combinations of items together, just go through sequentially and you will replicate it easily.
    
- **Factorising numerators**
    
    If you have a fraction like this:
    
    $$
    \begin{equation*}\frac{3a+3b}{3}\end{equation*}
    $$
    
    You can factorise the top by `3` and immediately cancel it out. This saves you needing to split the fraction in half, then cancel each half, and put them back together again.
    
- **Fast Reciprocal Evaluation**
    
    When you add a reciprocal like so to an expression:
    
    $$
    \frac{1}{x}
    $$
    
    You can very quickly figure out what this will do to an equation based on whether `x` is an **integer** or a **fraction.**
    
    If it's an integer, it will just make its way onto the bottom and there's nothing more you can do about that.
    
    If it's a fraction, all you need to do is **flip** the fraction on the bottom.
    
- **Large sums**
    
    Sometimes you can avoid very large sums if you simply go a different way in a certain calculation.