# 5. Line Graphs

# Line Equation

There are two way of expressing a straight line. You can either use $y=mx+c$ *or* you can use $ax+by+c = 0$.

<aside>
⚠️ **NOTE:** The second form is not a quadratic, even though it looks a little like it!

</aside>

Getting the second form out of the traditional form is just a simple case of rearrangement. Simply move the `y` over and you'll have it there. **However,** `a`, `b` and `c` are all integers in the second form, so make sure you multiply them into integers.

> One very important thing to note about this form is `a`, `b`and `c` are all **integers,** so when creating this form out of the traditional form, you may need to multiply everything in the equation by a certain number to ensure those values are
> 

The `c` in this equation is *not* the **y-intercept.** The **y-intercept** in the second form is represented as:

$$
\begin{equation*}\frac{-c}{b}\end{equation*}
$$

The **gradient** in the second form is represented as:

$$
\begin{equation*}\frac{-a}{b}\end{equation*}
$$

### **Proof**

There are two ways you can prove these for the y-intercept.

1. **By rearranging -** If you divide everything within the second form by `b`, you can eliminate the `by` into `y`. Once you've done that, you can rearrange it into `y=mx+c`d And there's the value in `c`.
2. **By removing** - When you're at the **y-intercept,** the **x** is always **0**. And as a result you *can* just remove the `ax` entirely. This will leave you with `by+c=0`, and you can then just move the `c` and `b` over to make `-c/b`. This is an alternative for why the y-intercept is that value.

# Parallel & Perpendicular

A line is **parallel** to another when it never touches the other line. This can only happen when the gradient is the same, and they're moving at the same angle, so parallel lines always have the same **m**. However, the **y-intercept** is different. In what way it's different varies a lot on the parallel line.

A line is **perpendicular** to another when it touches the other line once at a right angle. The **gradient** of this line always follows this relationship:

$$
m_{2} = \frac{-1}m_{1}
$$

<aside>
⚠️ You can remember the *negative* on the top of the fraction as the graph begins to drop *down* if it’s up against a graph going up.

</aside>

# Gradient Calculation

You can find the gradient of a line using the following equation:

$$
m = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}
$$

It doesn’t actually matter if you do $\frac{y_1 - y_2}{x_1 - x_2}$, just as long as it is the *y* over the *x*.

A lot of questions may use the gradient equation to find points other than the gradient. In these situations, you can immediately use this re-arrangement of the equation, which is often a very easy equation to substitute within.

$$
\begin{equation*}y_{2} - y_{1} = m ({x_{2} - x_{1})}\end{equation*}
$$