# 8. Binomials

A **binomial** is any bracket with $(a+b)$ in it. **bi** meaning "two" and **nomial** meaning terms

Generally, this section focuses on quick expansion and operation with such binomials.

# The $^{n}C_r$ Function

A very useful function we can use when expanding binomials quickly is to use $^nC_r$. This tells us the **coefficient** of certain terms when expanding a binomial. 

The function is defined like so (provided in the exam):

$$
\frac{n!}{r!(n-r)!}
$$

<aside>
💡 Remember that it's $n-r$ in the second factorial - so it's super easy to find what it is just by subtracting the two.

</aside>

However, you often don't need to know this or use this as the calculator provides the function already and you are usually allowed to use that.

As indicated by the name, $^nC_r$ takes in two values, `n` and `r`. As seen later, when expanding, the `n` is the power we put the binomial to, while the `r` is *which* coefficient we want to find. 

We often write it as $\begin{pmatrix}n \\ r \end{pmatrix}$, because it's more convenient. This is slightly confusing as it's not a vector or anything, but it is what it is.

$^nC_r$ is really linked to **pascal's triangle.** You can find the value of anything on pascal's triangle using $^{(n-1)}C_{(r+1)}$.

# Binomial Expansion

The main thing $^nC_r$ is used for is quickly expanding a binomial to the power of a value. There is a certain method to doing this. Here's an example:

$$
(x + 4)^3 = 4^3 + \begin{pmatrix}3 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}(4)^2x^1 + \begin{pmatrix}3 \\ 2 \end{pmatrix}(4)^1x^2 + x^3
$$

<aside>
💡 To prevent yourself from making mistakes, remember that on the middle terms, the **powers** must add up to your power on the left, and the `n` in the $^nC_r$ must be the same as the power on the second term.

</aside>

If you have a term such as:

$$
(2x + 12)^2
$$

It's exactly the same operation, it's still a binomial.

<aside>
⚠️ One **very common mistake** you might (and did) fall for, is when you have a question like above, make sure you always write $(2x)^n$ in each term and *not* $2x^n$!

</aside>

<aside>
🖊️ If you avoid writing the whole thing, you must make sure you put $+ ...$ at the end.

</aside>

If you’re asked to *find* the power - your best bet is to **expand** it out (to a reasonable degree) first, and then let that form an equation in algebra.

## Double Expansion

You may get a question that asks you to find the coefficient of $x^3$ in:

$$
(2+x)(3-2x)^7
$$

To do this, you can:

1. *Expand* the second bracket using the binomial rules from above, giving the following:
    
    $$
    (2+x)(3^7+...x+...x^2+...x^3 + ...) 
    $$
    
2. Then, take each term from the first bracket and determine **which** term it would go with to give you $x^3$. In this case, 
    
    For the $2$ term, you can multiply it by the $x^3$ to get a $x^3$.
    
    For the $x$ term, you can multiply it by the $x^2$ to get a $x^3$.
    
3. Do these multiplications and add them together, like so:
    
    $$
    ...x^3 + 2...x^3
    $$
    
4. *Collect like terms* for your answer

$$
(x + a)^n = \begin{pmatrix}n \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}a^{n-1}x^1 + \begin{pmatrix}n \\ 2 \end{pmatrix}a^{n-2}x^2 + ...
$$