# 1. Partial/+ Fracs

# Partial Fractions

You can break apart a fraction in the form $\frac{x}{ab}$ into $\frac{A}{a} + \frac{B}{b}$. This is known as breaking it into partial fractions. 

There is a certain process of doing this, which is described below, there are two ways of doing the solving bit, and one may be quicker than the other, it varies:

**Step 1 (What we’re doing)**

First, write out what you’re doing as an identity:

$$
\frac{x + 5}{(x+3)(x-4)} \equiv \frac{A}{x + 3} + \frac{B}{x - 4}
$$

**Step 2 (The Setup)**

Move the denominator of the main fraction to the other side and simplify, to create:

$$
x + 5 \equiv A(x-4) + B(x+3)
$$

**Step 3 (The Solving) - Substitution Method**

Substitute values of $x$ that *get rid of* either $A$ or $B$. So, to get rid of $B$, we can make $x = -3$ - which will put 0 against it. So, all our working works out like this:

$$
\text{For x = 4: } 2 = -7A \\
\phantom{For x = -3:} A = \frac{2}{-7} \phantom{....} \\
\space \\
\text{For x = -3: } 9 = 7B \\
\phantom{For x = 4:} B = \frac{9}{7}
$$

**Step 3 - Comparing Coefficients Method**

*Expand* everyone out to get $x$ terms and non-$x$ terms, and then we can use that to form our answer:

$$
x + 5 = Bx + 3B + Ax - 4A
$$

Now, we can see that:

$$
\red{x} \green{+ 5} = \red{Ax + Bx} + \green{3B - 4A} \\
\red{1 = A + B} \rarr A = 1 - B \text{ (1) }\\ 
\green{5 = 3B - 4A} \text{ (2)} \\
\space \\
5 = 3B - 4(1-B) \\
5 = 3B - 4 + 4B \\
5 = -4 + 7B \\
9 = 7B \\
\text{etc.}
$$

*(Substitution is more applicable for a maths algebra solving algorithm)*

**Step 4 (The conclusion)**

Don’t forget to write a conclusion (in the case of substitution especially) with any necessary simplifications in it!

$$
\frac{x + 5}{(x+3)(x-4)} \equiv \frac{\frac{2}{-7}}{x + 3} + \frac{\frac{9}{7}}{x - 4} \equiv \frac{2}{-x - 21} + \frac{\frac{9}{7}}{x - 4}
$$

## Repeated factors

A special situation you may get when doing this is when you have repeated factors in the denominator. E.g. $\frac{2x+9}{(x-5)(x+3)^2}$. For this, you should write your initial identity as:

$$
\frac{2x+9}{(x-5)(x+3)^2} \equiv \frac{A}{x-5} + \frac{B}{x+3} + \frac{C}{(x+3)^2} 
$$

This does however require an extra step at the end. In the example above, after doing the rearrangement to the second step, you’ll find that you end up with *two terms* on the B. What you actually have to do to find it is find the $A$ and $C$ first, then use **comparing coefficients** (in your mind) on *something* in the equation - usually it’s easiest to do the $x^2$ terms - with $0$ on the LHS since there isn’t an $x^2$ there.

<aside>
✒️ Be very careful with what the coefficients of all the $x^2$ terms are. E.g. if you have $(x+1)^2(2x+1)$ in the denominator of your original fraction, the coefficient of one of the $x^2$s is going to be $2$, so you have to keep an eye out.

</aside>

# Adding Fractions

When you add two fractions, you know you need to multiply each fraction by the other one’s denominator to get them the same, then you can combine the top. And there are a few tricks you can use to do this more effectively, so here’s a few things to keep in mind when doing this that’ll make it faster/easier:

1. **Factorise first** - If you have a factorizable bit in one of the fractions - factorise it first! It almost always works out to saving you work down the line.
2. **Non-full multiplication** - If you have two terms on the denominator of one of the sides, e.g. $\frac{x}{ab} + \frac{y}{b}$, just multiply the right fraction by $a$ to get them the same. No need to fully multiply the two denominators together which can be *very* painful.

# Improper Fractions

An **improper algebraic fraction** is one where the numerator has an *equal or* *higher degree* than the denominator. And this isn’t useful if we want to break things into partial fractions and other stuff.

If we think about a normal improper fraction, what we normally do is turn it into a whole number and the fractional remainder of that, and we add them (or multiply them which is just the same thing, in a different form), and it’s the same here, so we can say that:

$$
\frac{A}{B} \equiv C + \frac{D}{B}
$$

Noticing how the $B$ is shared because the denominator doesn’t change in this process. Here’s an example of what this looks like after calculation.

$$
\frac{x^2+5x+8}{x-2} \equiv x + 7 + \frac{22}{x-2}
$$

Now, there are two methods to *doing* that calculation to get this result, and they’re covered before:

**Algebraic division**

We can use algebraic long division to do this really easily, just divide the top by the bottom, and you’ll get a remainder and quotient, who go into $C$ and $D$ respectively.

**Comparing coefficients**

With comparing coefficients, our initial identity is usually multiplied by $B$ on both sides to make *(so if you see this, you should be applying comparing coefficients)*:

$$
A \equiv BC + D
$$

This one works by looking more closely at these values actually expanded out. So, here’s an example for us to use:

$$
x^3+x^2-7 \equiv (Ax^2+Bx+C)(x-3)+D
$$

What you do is:

1. Do **substitution** into x to find the *non-x* numbers (find $C$ and $D$)
2. Expand the RHS side out (you *can* do this in your head)
3. Apply comparing coefficients with the $x^3$, $x^2$s etc.