# 10. Num Methods

This chapter is all about *roots* and ways of approximating *roots* when it’s too hard to find them yourself.

An **interval** is a section of a graph, usually in the x axis. It can be represented with the notation $[\text{min}, \text{max}]$, which means between $\text{min}$ and $\text{max}$.

# Sign check

## Prove there are roots

You can *prove* there are roots between two positions (known as an interval) using a sign check - what you do is you find the y value on the left and the y value on the right, and if the sign changed, then we know it must have crossed through the y-axis.

If there is a sign change, there’s an *odd number* of roots between the two. 

If there is no sign change, there’s an *even number* of roots between the two.

<aside>
💡 This only works if your function is **continuous** in the interval, and there’s no jumping going on.

</aside>

## Prove the approx pos of roots

If you have the exact unrounded position of a root, you can just sub it into the equation and see if it gives you 0. But sometimes you’ll be given questions where you’re given an *approximate position* of a root that’s rounded, and need to show that it is there.

To do this, you have to use the sign check above to check the graph all along the region that could’ve rounded to that number, and see if there’s one there. So if you’re asked to show that there a root at $2.307$ (to 3 d.p.), you’d check the interval $[2.3065,2.3075]$.

# Iteration

If we don’t know the position of a root at all, we can use an *iteration formula* to find one.

The way you come up with these iteration formulas is you make your original function do $f(x) = 0$ and then **rearrange it** into something in the form of $x= \text{Something in terms of x}$, and then make the $x$ on the left your $x_{n+1}$ and the $x$ on the right in your $x_n$. There’s **multiple** iteration formulas you can make because there’s multiple different ways you can rearrange things with multiple $x$s, and some work sometimes, while others work other times, some will head to one root, some will head to another, you really just have to test them out and see what happens.

<aside>
🖊️ **TIP:** In the exam, use the Ans and = spamming trick on your calculator to do these iterations quickly - just **make sure you show substitution for $x_1$**.

</aside>

## Successful vs unsuccessful

A **divergent** iteration formula is one that will get further and further away from a root as you go on - these don’t work and are unsuccessful if you see them. You can tell when an iteration series is divergent when the ***difference*** between each iteration is *growing,* it’s going more and more off.

However, a **convergent** iteration formula is good, it’s getting closer and closer to a value, and that value is a root.

## Graphical representation

Now, if we actually look at what we have here with $x= \text{Terms of x}$, what this is really saying if you think about it is we have *two graphs*, $y=x$ and the RHS, and we’re looking at when they intersect.

So, in order to sketch our iteration formulas, we literally just draw $y=x$ and our RHS together. And once you’ve sketched that you can *show* the iteration by doing this:

1. Draw a line starting from your x position and going upwards to your curve
2. Bounce it off the curve over to the $y=x$ line
3. Make it go back to the curve again

<aside>
🖊️ You can remember that we always go to the curve first by thinking about it alphabetically: **c**urve, then **l**ine.

</aside>

### Iteration shape

Depending on the shape of the graph, applying the above process will give you one of two different shapes.

## Graphical representation

You can graphically show the iteration process on diagrams using the $y=x$ line. What you do is you:

1. You can remember that it’s the curve first because **c** is before **l** in the alphabet.

When you do this, you’ll get one of two shapes:

- **Staircase diagram** -

# Newton-Raphson method

A more efficient method of performing the iteration above is through the **Newton-Raphson method -** this method works by following the tangent at different points around, which often leans it closer and closer to the root. 

Quite simply all you do is apply this equation:

Now, it’s worth noting that this method does have two problems:

1. You can’t apply this on the turning point of a curve as $f'(x)$ is zero there and you can see what’s happening
2. You need to be able to differentiate the function.