# 7. Trig Rules

There are a few rules we have for trig functions and how they behave.

# Addition Identities

There’s a rule that describes a break-down of $f(A + B)$ and $f(A - B)$, where $f$ is any of the trig functions. You don’t need to *know* these but you need to **recognise** them, so you can go in the reverse if needed!

$$
\sin(A \pm B) = \sin A \cos B \pm \cos A \sin B \\
\cos(A \pm B) = \cos A \cos B \mp \sin A \sin B \\
\tan(A \pm B) = \frac{\tan A \pm \tan B}{1 \mp \tan A \tan B} \\
$$

The cool thing about these is you can actually use them to find the exact values of angles like $\sin 15$, because that’s $\sin(45-30)$, which we can rearrange and turn into just exact angles.

## Remembering them

Now, while you don’t “**need”** to know them, it’s really ideal for you to have a good idea of how they expand out to save you valuable time in the exam. 

The way it works is both the $\sin$ and $\cos$ ones follow a similar pattern: Two trig functions on the left and two on the right of some sign.

And here’s the rule to know how to arrange those:

- $\sin(a \pm b)$ - **Different function, same sign**
- $\cos(a\pm b)$ - **Different sign, same function**

# Double Angle Identities

We also have *double angle identities*, which literally just come from using the previous identities with the same value on both sides of the sign. Once again, you don’t need to **know** these, but **NEED** to be able to recognise them! Wouldn’t want a question like “Simplify $\cos^2 x - \sin^2x$” and have no idea what to do!

$$
\sin 2A \equiv 2\sin A \cos A \\
\cos 2A \equiv \cos^2A - \sin^2A \\
\phantom{...} \equiv 2\cos^2A - 1 \\
\phantom{...} \equiv 1-2\sin^2A \\
\\
\tan 2A \equiv \frac{2\tan A}{1 - \tan^2 A}
$$

## $\cos$ variants

You’ll notice that the $\cos$ double-angle expansion has three variants. The true one is the $\cos^2{A} - \sin^2{A}$, which as you should know from remembering the $\cos$ addition formula, is very blatantly just that simplified a little.

To make the other two rewrites of it, all you need to do is take advantage of $\sin^2{A} + \cos^2{A} \equiv 1$.

## Reversing the Process

Once again, you need to be able to go from the RHS to the LHS in questions **and** be careful with the $\sin$ one because sometimes it doesn’t just *look the same* as the RHS, but it is the same!

For instance, if you have something in the form $\sin8\cos8$, you can do this to get the double angle out of it $\frac{1}2(2\sin 8 \cos 8)$, and then get $\frac{1}2\sin16$.

# Exact Values

When you have the exact value of one of the three trig functions (e.g. $\sin x = \frac{a}b$) , it’s possible to *also* find the value of other trig functions, like $\cos x$ or $\tan x$. They almost never expect you to actually inverse and find the $x$ angle because you often break out of the exactness when you do that. And it makes sense you can do this when you think about it, given $\cos$ and $\sin$ are just a translation away from each other and $\tan x$ is an identity away. 

The most reliable way of transferring between these three functions is by drawing a quick little right-angle triangle and using $S^O_H - C^A_H - T^O_A$, here’s the general process:

1. Draw a right-angled triangle, assigning the two sides we know from the trig function we have the value of (e.g. $\sin x = \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}$, $o = 1$, $h = \sqrt{5}$)
2. Use Pythagoras to find the other third side.
3. Find whatever other functions you need from there. 

## Trig insertion

As one of the smaller parts of these exact value questions, you might sometimes be asked something like “Show that $x - y = \frac{\pi}4$”, where you *don’t know* the exact values of the $x$ and $y$ but know them in terms of trig functions.

When you get a question like this, what it’s actually wanting you to do is put trig functions into it and consider them instead. For example, we know that $\tan{\frac{\pi}4}$ is equal to $1$. So therefore $\tan(x-y)$ must *equal $1$* if it’s the same*,* and we can show it like that.

<aside>
🖊️ I like to write out “If $x-y= \frac{\pi}4, \text{then} \tan{x-y}=\tan{\frac{\pi}4}=1$”

</aside>

# R-Conversion / Harmonic Identities

When you have something in the form $a \sin x \pm b\cos x$, it’s actually possible to turn this into a **single trig function** with a translation and scale! You can even see this by getting Desmos to sketch it, it’s just a single wave.

There are two things we can transform this into: $R\sin(x \pm \alpha)$ or $R\cos(x \mp \alpha)$, and you do need to know that these are the targets you can turn it into.

<aside>
🖊️ The $\mp$ represents the fact that the sign is *reverse* of what you get in the original equation.

</aside>

Here’s how to do the rearrangement:

**Step 1 (The Essential Identity)**

Our target is represented as $R \sin(x+\alpha)$, so, like all of these damn processes, start with an identity showing this:

$$
a \sin x + b\cos x \equiv R\sin(x+\alpha)
$$

**Step 2 (Coefficient Match by getting them similar)**

Now, we can rearrange the RHS to look more like the left with the addition formula:

$$
a \sin x + b\cos x \equiv R \sin x \cos \alpha + R \cos x \sin \alpha
$$

And looking it you should be able to see some coefficient matching going on, to get $R \cos \alpha = a \space (1)$ and $R \sin \alpha = b \space (2)$.

**Step 3a (Find R)**

Use the formula $R = \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}$ to find value of R.

- Proof
    
    We use the identity $\sin^2 \theta + \cos^2 \theta \equiv 1$, and put $R^2$ into it by multiplying both sides by it, like so: $R^2\sin^2\theta + R^2\cos^2\theta \equiv R^2$.
    
    Now by applying our result from coefficient matching we get something that goes like $a^2 + b^2 = R^2$, and therefore  $R = \sqrt{a^2+b^2}$.
    

**Step 3b (Find $\alpha$)**

We can do $(2) \div (1)$ to get $\frac{R\sin \alpha}{R\cos \alpha} = \tan \alpha = \frac{b}a$, which you can then rearrange to find $\alpha$.

## Surrounding Questions

You may be asked to find the maximum value of something in the form $a\sin x \pm b \cos x$, in which case you simply need to perform the R-conversion and take your y translation value.

You will likely also be asked to find *where* that max point first occurs. You *can do this* by visualizing a graph and its transformation but the speed hack I’d recommend you do is literally just… *Solve* when your R-conversion expression equals the max point to find when that max point happens. E.g. if you have $\sqrt{25}\sin(x+45)$, you can just solve when it equals $\sqrt{25}$ which’ll simplify and work out very nicely.

# Proving Identities

Sometimes you’ll be given a question in the exam that asks you to *prove* that a given identity is true. There are **FOUR** very important things you need to know to do these:

1. $\sin^2x+\cos^2x\equiv1$
2. $\frac{\sin x}{\cos x} \equiv \tan x$
3. **Addition Formulae**
4. **Double-angle Formulae - Don’t forget stuff like $\sin A \cos A$ can be turned into the RHS of these!** 

Never forget when you absolutely *trashed* an exam because you forgot the last two are valid transformations - in ***both ways!***

# Modelling with trig

Sometimes you’ll get worded questions that give you a model like $P = 11.5-0.5\sin(t-2)$.

When you have models like these, you may get asked questions like “What’s the min and max values?” To answer this, we can simply consider both the lowest and highest values you can get from the $\sin$ and then sub in for each. (Alternatively you could down an insane path of sketching out the $\sin$ with all the transformations but, why would you do that…)