# Data (1)

*TODO: Add stuff about the **geography** of places*

- Where they are relative to each other
- Whether they’re on the coasts of countries or not
- What hemisphere they’re on (affects which is currently experiencing Winter and which is currently experiencing Summer at a given time)

A **population** is a whole set of items that are of interest.

A **census** is where you observe and measure every member of a population. The advantage of a census is it’s **100% accurate.**

A **sample** is where you observe and measure a certain sub-section of a population. You often need to do this because it is much less time consuming and expensive, and there’s less data to process than in a census.

# Sampling

When you’re sampling, you organise the population into a **sampling frame** - this is a list of all the people or things in the sample and is comprised of lots of smaller **sampling units.** 

<aside>
🖊️ When answering questions asking about evaluating the advantages and disadvantages, you **need to** link it to the original question.

</aside>

## Random Sampling

With random sampling, every member has an **equal chance of being selected**, but these methods **all need sampling frames**.

There are three methods of doing random sampling:

### **Simple random sampling**

Assign each sampling unit a unique number and use a computer, calculator or via lottery sampling you can place numbers in a hat and pick them out at random:

- It’s **free of bias**
- It’s not **suitable on larger populations** as it’s time-consuming and expensive

### **Systematic sampling**

Choose a random starting point, and then an interval for the number of people you want to sample, and then go through and pick people at regular intervals. It’s: 

- **Suitable on larger populations.**
- But it can introduce bias if the **sampling frame is not random.**

### **Stratified sampling**

Organise the sampling units into **strata** (groups) and sample a proportional amount from each. It’s:

- **Representative of the population structure**
- **Guarantees proportional representation of groups**
- Population must be **clearly classified** into strata
- Selection within each stratum suffers from the same issue as *simple random sampling*: It’s not **suitable on larger populations**.

So essentially, use systematic sampling for **larger populations**, and **stratified sampling** for populations with a clear structure.

## Non-random sampling

There are also two methods of not random sampling:

### **Quota sampling**

Where an interviewer/researcher divides a population into groups according to a given characteristic, and sets a quota for the number of people needed to ask per group, which 

### **Opportunity sampling**

This is a sample based on people or resource available at a given time.

# Large data set

One thing you need to work with is the **large data set -** this is a set comprised of data from 8 weather stations. **Five** of which are in the UK and three are **overseas**. There are measurements from **1987** and **2015** included.

### All Weather Stations

We have the following data for all the weather stations.

Temperature - Daily **mean** temperature**,** which is measured in $\degree C$. Rounded to **1 decimal place**.

Rainfall - Daily **total** rainfall, measured in $mm$. Anything below $0.05$ is recorded as ‘tr’. Includes snow and hail.

Pressure - Daily **mean** pressure - measured in hectopascals ($hPa$). It used to be measured in **millibars**, but now we use hectopascal. But don’t worry, **1hPa = 1mb**.

Wind - Daily **mean** windspeed, measured in **knots**. **1 knot = 1.15mph.** There is also **Beaufort conversion** of this given, which measures it as “Fresh”, “Light”, “Moderate” etc.

### UK Weather Stations

In addition, we have some extra details from the UK weather stations.

First, we now also have the **wind direction** 

Sunshine - Daily total sunshine. Measured in **hours**, how many hours of sunshine there is. Rounded to **1 decimal point**.

Wind - We now also have the **wind direction** (measured in **bearings** and **cardinal directions**) and the **maximum gust,** which is the highest windspeed - with direction.

Cloud - Amount of cloud coverage. Measured in **oktas** - eighths.

Humidity - We also have the **daily maximum relative humidity,** which is a **percentage** value. Anything above **95%** is a misty/foggy condition.

Visibility - Measured in **decameters**.