# Moments (4)

A moment (measured in $N \space m$) is a *rotational force.* The value of the moment at a force is really simple, it’s the distance from the pivot **multiplied by** the force strength (where the force is **perpendicular** to the distance**)**. The most painfully obvious example of this in practice is the door handles on doors. They’re never next to the hinge because that’d be really hard to turn. The *moment* is better the further away the handle is from the hinge.

When dealing with rotational values, we write “clockwise” and “anticlockwise” against our values at all times. There’s nothing weird about how we combine moments to get a resultant value (I had some worries initially because I completely messed up the distances on some questions, that’s all).

Many moments questions are centred around rods. These rods can have **supports** (a.k.a. pivots) and **attachments**. Be careful that you don’t mix these up, because you have a few times.

# Working with moments

There’s a few key concepts you should understand when working with moments:

1. If you have **multiple forces** applying to an object, you can “resolve moments” for any one of those forces, with the notation $R(P)$. On one side goes all your clockwise moments and on the other all your anti-clockwise moments.
2. A **really useful technique** you should *always* be looking for is that if you resolve moments on a force, *that force* will disappear every single time, because it has a distance of 0. So if you have one unknown *in the way* of your main… Just resolve there and it’ll be gone!
3. To determine if a force will cause a clockwise or anticlockwise movement, just put your pen *across the distance* and imagine it’s being pushed by the force on that distance..

# Uniform rods

One common exam question category is when you have moments applying to uniform rods. A **uniform rod** is literally just a rod where the mass applies perfectly in the centre. If these rods are in equilibrium, we can write $R(\updownarrow)$ and do “Up = Down” equations. And of course, if the rod is “resting”, that means the forces are in equilibrium.

If a rod is not uniform, that means there’s a mass applying on it ***somewhere***. You can often guess based on certain things which direction it’s biased in for your diagram. You can find the distance through solving moments.